---
title: "Spirituality"
date: 2021-06-03T08:53:00-04:00
draft: false
---
The following is an essay I wrote to myself during late summer 2019. Since then, many things have changed, and I would probably re-write this essay with different language, but the overall ideas are still important to me. This piece forces me to take a step back and take the mental position of myself during the time of writing, and I always find a bit of peace in doing so. I think it is a valuable thing to re-read from time to time, so I'm putting it here in hopes that a piece of this will resonate with whoever visits the site. Enjoy.

---

#writing+projects/essays/complete

When I reflect back on my summer, I realize is that I simply had the opportunity to understand and live my beliefs. I took time to relax, let the dust settle, saw what remained, and attempted to live my day-to-day life with the lessons learned from watching this process. This is a summary of what I learned.

Before this summer, my life was very much about separation. I always spoke and wrote about dualities that I thought existed between different “parts” of myself. For example, I would often talk about there being “one part of me that just wants to be a creative musician, and spend his whole life creating art” and there being “another part who loves research, math, and science, and the more rational ways of solving problems in the world”. This, I didn’t realize at the time, was actually boosting my sense of identity/ego, and making it more difficult to actually act on any of what I believed, because deep down I was afraid of letting parts of myself die that I seemingly spent my whole life creating.

One important realization along this line of inquiry was when I realized the pervasiveness of my self-absorption. I realized that in all of my dealings with the world, I was stuck trying to think about how I was perceiving, always asking “well, what am I supposed to learn about this?”. Being present was impossible, and I thought that by analyzing my perceptions of my immediate environment that I was being present, but that is simply untrue. There was a mental war that I was raging in myself between all of the dualities that I built. When I broke my wrist, and when things burned up with Hannah, there was a forced death of different parts of my identity. I could no longer play guitar, I couldn’t workout, and I didn’t have my best friend to talk to that could help me figure out how to handle what was in front of me. I felt that I was on extremely unstable ground, and needed to go deep into myself to figure out what I could stand on.

This led to to the first half of the summer. The first half was all about taking things in and putting them in their place. I wrote about what I believed, read books that supplemented and changed these beliefs, and assimilated my new findings with my previous ideology about how I should live in the world. This led me to Thoreau, Marcus Aurelius, Aldous Huxley, books on psychedelics, and others that all provided similar information about what the true nature of reality is, and how one should navigate it. I was still in my cast during this time, so it was a perfect period to just consume information, and write about what I felt about it. There was a lot of mental experimentation during this time, and I essentially spent 100% of my time breaking apart my beliefs in my head, and playing devil’s advocate with everything that entered my consciousness.

Eventually, I found myself on a trip to visit friends in San Francisco, and made another important discovery. My writing was becoming extremely circular, and I realized that I had broke everything down about as far as it could go, and the habit of continuous devil’s advocate was no longer breaking new ground. At this point, I decided it was time to put everything together. I wrote my “manifesto” of everything that I thought I believed from the ground up, and spent the few days after building on that to create a comprehensive picture of reality that I thought could create a fulfilling life.

When I returned from San Francisco, there was an intermediate period of letting the dust settle and turning off my brain that needed to follow, and that perfectly aligned with a week up north with the family having some fun during the 4th of July. I simply relaxed, read some books, and tried to enjoy myself and forget about everything else.

After the conclusion of this intermediate period began the second half of my summer: living my beliefs. This began the day that I left for Montana. From the second I got in the car, I decided, in line with my new ideas on how to live, that I would simply say yes to everything and just be in the moment for the remainder of the trip. That is exactly what happened. I spent the last few weeks relaxing, enjoying myself, learning when I had the opportunity, and experiencing life when I could. The result was that all of my beliefs were modified and strengthened so that I felt even more comfortable with being alive and felt even more connected to the world.

One thing that changed was my perception of these dualities that I thought existed in my life. I realized that none of them matter. One day I could be a musician, the next I could be a mathematician, and I could end the week a philosopher. What I realized though, was that there was a common thread throughout all of what I wanted to be. That thread was discovery. I want to learn, grow, experience, change, develop, fail, try again, and continue to learn. I realized that I didn’t actually care about society’s definition of success. I had mine. That definition really came down to the answer to the questions of “How much love do I have?” and “How present/connected do I feel to this moment, right now?”. Success to me meant the answers were “as much as possible” and “completely” to those questions. Once I realized this, I was liberated. I truly stopped caring about the opinions of others and turned my attention to life. I fell in love with being alive and wanted to learn everything about it, and experience every part. Why? Because it’s incredible. There is a process, that we cannot fathom, that created the trees and the mountains and the rivers and all of the life that inhabits it. We pale in comparison to that incredible mystery, and it is nothing short of total arrogance to care so much about yourself and the opinions of others. You have an opportunity, right now, to be alive and feel connected to everything in front of you. Liberation is possible right now, and you can learn anything.

In short, what I realized is that life is already perfect. Every part of it. The most important thing in the world is right now. The only important thing to do is love life fully and deeply. If you make your decisions out of a desire to love and understand, all will be will. Society and life is so transient that if you put too much stake in things that are constantly shifting, you will never be on stable ground. The only stable ground is the fact that you are aware, right now. Stand on that and let it be enough. You are enough. You can love more deeply, you can experience life more deeply through researching and respecting all natural parts of it. There is no separation between the different parts of yourself. There is just right now.

Moving forward, my only task is to remember this and continue to grow and iterate on top of it. There are a few ways that I think I’ll be able to do that, and here is a brief list of those tactics:

	1. Get into nature. Feel small. Let it heal you.
	2. Stare your fears directly in the face and do not be ashamed of them. Go directly at them and seek to learn, love, and understand.
	3. There are different levels of knowledge. To know something is not simply to be able to discuss it. Reality is not words, it is experience. To know something fully is to experience the knowing.
	4. Your life will open up in direct proportion to how you simplify it. Get rid of distracting voices, get rid of what you can that distracts you from right now.
	5. You can feel freedom in all parts of your life. You can feel it while brushing your teeth, reading a book, playing video games, or any other part of your life. You don’t have to go live alone with no distractions to do it, but it might help remind you of what’s important from time to time.
	6. Nothing substitutes for direct experience. You can think all you want, but thought is simply thought. It means nothing if you cannot live it. Never miss an opportunity to practice what you preach, right now.
	7. You are the mountains, you are the trees. The same process that created them created you. Respect yourself as that process. You are worth all of the love that you want to give.
	8. If you can accept death, you can accept life. You must accept and embrace death as another beautiful part of life. If you can do this fully, you will have no more fear. There is profound liberation available in profound suffering, and to internalize this is to accept all parts of life.
	9. What you must do in your life is simple. Do what allows you to love more. Do what allows you to feel more connected to the present. Build and iterate on this.
	10. You don’t need to be healthy and fit to practice love, but it helps. You don’t need shelter to have love, but it helps. You still need to survive to be able to grow on your love and help disseminate it. It’s okay to get a traditional job, and do things that help you stay happy and alive. Just don’t put so much value on these conventions. Your true god is life. Try to create a life that lets you explore and respect life as fully and deeply as possible, but if you don’t have that right now, it’s okay! It’s all good right now and always.

To conclude. I finally learned **_why_** it’s okay and what it actually feels like to relax. It’s okay to surrender. It’s okay to die. It’s okay to not be perfect. It’s okay to not be exactly what everyone wants you to be. You are a perfect piece of life, like the trees are perfect trees and water is perfect water. There is no separation in life. We are simply all trying to create an existence that makes us happy. Until we can experience the knowledge of total presence, we must respect all parts and allow the feelings of separation to persist. The body is real, the mind is real, consciousness is real. All of it is real, but maybe not in the way you think it is. Accept it all and make these beliefs deeper by practicing them and experiencing them more deeply. Invite death in so you can invite life in. Invite everything in. Everything. This is how you liberate yourself. The key is simply profound love and surrender.
